# User&#39;s guide for Smart Spot Starter Kit

## Introduction

In order to offer a simple and intuitive way to get started with our Smart Spot
we have developed an Open Source solution called Smart Spot Starter Kit, which
has an obvious educational purpose. Just by simply obtaining this kit and follow
this guide you will be able to manage the device and to acquire data from its
board sensors, apart from the ones you connect with your smartphone.

To achieve this, we take advantage from technologies like Physical Web. Users
interact via their smartphones thanks to our device that sends &quot;push&quot;
notifications with digital content through Bluetooth without the need to install native 
Apps.

In order to monitorize the air pollution, Smart Spot measures the NO2, CO, SO2
and O3 at specific points in real time. We have a sophisticated high precision
lab, with a Mass Flow Controller and a Zero Air Generator, where through Machine
Learning algorithms we improve the precision of our sensor measures reducing
the effect of cross sensitivity.

For the care and management of data collected by the Smart Spot a maintenance
platform is  needed, our device can be managed remotely by platforms which use
OMA LWM2M as FIWARE. We deploy FIWARE to manage Smart Spot data and also, we
integrate our solution in already existing FIWARE ecosystems.

Optionally, this system provides information about crowds in specific areas,
detecting people with smartphone WiFi switched-on.

## What do you need?
What is included with The Smart Spot Starter Kit:  

   1. [ESP32 DevKitC](https://www.amazon.com/Espressif-ESP32-ESP32-DEVKITC-ESP-WROOM-32-soldered/dp/B01N0SB08Q/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1519978147&sr=8-4&keywords=esp32+devkit):  
       ![ESP32-DevKitC](./images/ESP32-DevKitC.png)     
   2. Starter Kit firmware
      * Physical Web
      * Crowd Monitoring
      * LwM2M client
      * Integration with I2C sensor
      * GPIO driver
   3. [Expansion Board](http://www.hopu.eu/):  
      * Temperature, Humidity and Pressure Sensor.
      * Accelerometer and Gyroscope.
      * Luminosity Sensor
      * RGB led
      * GPIO Led   
   4. Micro USB Cable
   5. [Smart Spot Air Quality Expansion Board](http://www.hopu.eu/)  
   6. I2C Cable (included with the expansion board)  
      ![I2C Cable](./images/I2C.png)    
   7. 4 x [Gas Sensors](http://www.alphasense.com/index.php/air/):  
      * Sulfur Dioxide (Red).
      * Ozone + Nitrogen Dioxide (Yellow).
      * Carbon Monoxide (Green).
      * Nitrogen Dioxide (Orange).
      
      ![Device manager](./images/sensor.png)

You will need a PC loaded with Windows, Linux or Mac OS with internet connection
in order to download the Starter Kit firmware and the ESP32 toolchain and
ESP-IDF.

## Getting Started

This chapter is a guide for Windows users. In case you use another OS, you can find further information in the following link

[http://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/get-started/index.html](http://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/get-started/index.html)


   1. First, you need to download the ESP32 toolchain by clicking in this link: 
      [https://dl.espressif.com/dl/esp32\_win32\_msys2\_environment\_and\_toolchain-20180110.zip](https://dl.espressif.com/dl/esp32_win32_msys2_environment_and_toolchain-20180110.zip). 
      Unzip it and place somewhere safe. This guide assumes the environment is placed in 
      C:\ .

   2. You will also need the ESP32 API. In order to download it, open a terminal,
      navigate to a directory where you want to place the IDF and use these commands: _ .
      
      ~~~

      $ git clone --recursive https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf.git

      $ git checkout tags/v3.0-rc1

      $ git submodule update –init

      ~~~
     
      Every time you restart your PC you will need to define the IDF\ _PATH by using this command:
      
      ~~~

      $ export IDF\_PATH=&quot;C:/msys32/home/user-name/esp/esp-idf&quot;

      ~~~

      In case you want to set the path permanently, check out this link:

      [http://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/get-started/add-idf\_path-to-profile.html#add-idf-path-to-profile-windows](http://esp-idf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/get-started/add-idf_path-to-profile.html#add-idf-path-to-profile-windows)

   3. Now is time to download the Smart Sport Firmware. You should open a terminal in 
      another directory and clone our firmware by using the following command:
   
      ~~~

      $ git clone –-https://github.com/HOP-Ubiquitous/SmartSpot\_SmartSDK\_Firmware.git

      ~~~
 
   4. Once you downloaded everything, open the ESP32 toolchain in order to flash the 
      firmware. Go to the directory where you placed the toolchain and execute the 
      file mingw32.
      
         ![Device manager](./images/directory.png)
         
         
   5. Plug your ESP32 into your PC. Then go to Device Manager and look for its port number (i.e.: COM3).  
         ![Device manager](./images/device-manager.png)
         
      You may have to download its driver in case you are not able to flash. 
      Download it here.

      [https://www.silabs.com/products/development-tools/software/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers](https://www.silabs.com/products/development-tools/software/usb-to-uart-bridge-vcp-drivers)

   6. Copy the port and the directory of bootloader.bin, smartspot-esp32.bin, and
      partitions\_singleapp.bin. Replace it by the bolded words of the following
      command. Use it to flash the esp32.

      ~~~

      $ python 
      /c/Users/HOPU/GitHub/espidf/components/esptool_py/esptool/esptool.py --chip esp32 
      --port COMX --baud 115200 --before default_reset --after hard_reset 
      write_flash -z --flash_mode dio --flash_freq 40m --flash_size detect 0x1000      
      C:/Users/HOPU/GitHub/SmartSpot_SmartSDK_Firmware/bootloader.bin 0x10000
      C:/Users/HOPU/GitHub/SmartSpot_SmartSDK_Firmware/smartspot-esp32.bin 0x8000            
      C:/Users/HOPU/GitHub/SmartSpot_SmartSDK_Firmware/partitions_singleapp.bin
      
      ~~~
         
       ![Sensors](./images/python.png)

      A message like the one above should appear if you flashed the firmware successfully.

## Expansion board integration

This is a detailed list of the expansion board components:

   * **Bme280** : This well-known sensor from Bosch measures humidity with ±3% 
     accuracy, barometric pressure with ±1 hPa absolute accuracy, and temperature 
     with ±1.0°C accuracy. It can be used either with SPI or I2C.
   * **Mpu6050** : this sensor contains a MEMS accelerometer and a MEMS gyro in a
     single chip. It is very accurate, as it contains 16-bits analog to digital
     conversion hardware for each channel. Therefor it  captures the x, y, and z
     channel at the same time. The sensor uses the I2C-bus interface.
   * **Opt3001** : is a sensor that measures the intensity of visible light. The 
     spectral response of the sensor tightly matches the photopic response of the 
     human eye and includes significant infrared rejection.
   * **WS2812** : is an intelligent control LED light source that the control 
     circuit and RGB chip are integrated in a package of 5050 components. It
     internally includes digital port latch and reshaping amplification drive
     circuit. Each color has a different meaning, representing the current status of
     the Smart Spot:
      * Purple: Starting software.
      * Blue: Attaching to global connectivity.
      * Orange: Bootstrapping. Connecting to LwM2M servers.
      * Green: Device fully functional.
   * **GPIO Led** : is just simply a Led controlled by a GPIO pin of the ESP32. You
     can manage and switch it on/off from the dashboard.

The expansion board is completely plug and play. If you previously flashed the 
ESP32 correctly you will only have to plug it in its mark.

   ![Board](./images/board.png)
   
# Gas Sensor Integration

The idea is to connect the Smart Spot Starter Kit with the gas sensors. Between
the available gases, we selected the most important to quantify the air quality
(gases required by the OMS), the most interesting depending of the use cases but
also interesting gases to carry out corrections in measures:

   * NO2: Nitrogen dioxide
   * SO2: Sulfur dioxide
   * O3: Ozone
   * CO: Carbon monoxide

   ![Sensors](./images/sensors.png)

In order to carry out the connection between the expansion board and the Smart
Spot Air Quality Expansion Board you only have to plug the i2c cable in both
sides. You can use any i2c port you want since they all have the same behavior.
Finally, plug the gas sensors in the i2c board.

## Register your Smart Spot in the IoT Agent

First, you need to create a [WiFi AP](https://www.lifewire.com/use-your-android-phone-as-a-portable-wi-fi-hotspot-2377915) with your smartphone for the first
connection of the SmartSpot. Once you register in the IoT Agent, you can change
the WiFi parameters. This are the default SSID and password:

SSID: **defaultSSAP**

Password: **defaultSSAP1234**

Device URL Manager tool is used for manage the physicalweb url of any device by
software.

A smartPhone will detect a eddystone url advertisement with a fixed device url
that point to the Device Url Manager, then the Device Url Manager will redirect
the request to the real url.

To create a device with this tool you need specify a shortened mac and
the extern url associated on next url: http://url:port/api/v1/devices where:
   * url: url where is Device URL Manager tool
   * port: port to connect to Device URL Manager tool.

You can easily share the connection with your iOS or Android.  
   ![Connection](./images/connection.png)

## Fiware integrations

FIWARE offers an Open Ecosystem that join different technology enablers for
scalable data mangement and make feasible to integrate different services and 
Internet of Things devices into a common and interoperable framework based on
Open Standards. In particular, FIWARE is based on Open Standards such as OMA
NGSI for the Services Interface and ETSI ISG CIM for the data models.

In details, FIWARE has a strong role in the Smart Cities market, since the is
key to the growth and functionality of Smart Cities, for this reason we are
committed to initiatives such as Open and Agile Smart Cities (OASC) association
with over 100 cities enrolled and FIWARE technology as the basis for making it 
feasible.

Smart Spot is a FIWARE-ready device, it means that Smart Spot has been
validated, passed a set of tests, participated in plugfests and the most
important is supporting the APIs, FIWARE data models based on ETSI ISG CIM and
it is fully interoperable and integrated with key components from FIWARE such as
Orion Context Broker.

In details, Orion Context Broker is the core of FIWARE platform; since it
enables the common integration of heterogenous data sources into a common
component, which enables the capacity to carry out advanced queries, cross data
among heterogenous domains (e.g., noise with crowd, weather and mobility, etc.),
and finally it can exports data to several data analytics components such as
Hadoop / COSMOS (Big Data), SHT (Time Series), CKAN (Open Data), MongoDB
(Non-structured data), etc.

FIWARE and the solutions from HOP Ubiquitous are contributing to the creation of
adapted and standardized solutions to satisfy the described process from the
cocreation and citizens engagement to the deployment of solutions based on IoT
to reach the digitalization and enhancement of different areas in the city.

Thanks to the LwM2M Bootstrap Server deployed and integrated in the Homard
platform, it is really easy to setup the server configuration for a the device.
In this way, anyone can deploy its own LwM2M IOTAgent with a public server IP
and configure the device to integrate it in FIWARE.

A tutorial about Orion Context Broker has been developed by FIWARE and HOP
Ubiquitous, which can be downloaded in: [tutorial](http://goo.gl/o1KXcT)
